---
title: Sequel to a Manifesto
---

Almost two decades ago, I started writing what my wife would call my Manifesto—a concise summary of my philosophical and religious beliefs—and I finished it and posted it in 2006. It's [still online](http://pivarski.watson.org/manifesto.html) in all its vintage glory. (My name hasn't changed; I decided to use my maiden name on this book to keep it separate from my work life.) In the Manifesto, I talked about my then-recent conversion from atheism to Catholicism, but it was more about metaphysics than religion. In fact, it was so ambiguous that I received diametrically opposite praise: an evengetical Christian reading group and the president of an atheist society both told me that it was a great argument for or against belief (not sarcastically). What's worse, I can't tell which of them is right.

Thirteen years later, I still can't get on board the Scholastic metaphysics that underlies the vocabulary of Catholic theology. I can accept that some bread becomes Jesus's body, but not that other bread is fundamentally distinguishable from human flesh. Nor can I even think coherently about the mysticism at Catholicism's opposite pole. (That may be the point of mysticism.) There are many different kinds of Catholics—some have a more evengelical bent, some a Buddhist perspective, and some are particularly aware of Christianity's pagan roots. I have tried explaining that I'm an atheistic kind of Catholic, but that pair of words has never helped anyone understand what I mean.

The disconnect stems from the fact that I don't see "Does God exist?" as being a meaningful question. It assumes that we're settled on the definitions of such words as "God" and "exist" and merely need to determine if they can be used together. People's ideas of what the word "God" means are so varied that we might as well start with one's assertion that God exists or does not exist and use that to try to figure out what they mean by "God." For instance, one person may be thinking of God as "he in whom we live and move and have our being," a principle of rationality—creator of the universe in the sense that his mere existence makes 2 + 2 equal to 4 so that specific realities may rise up out of the chaos of existential absurdity. Another may think of God's nonexistence as an assertion that the universe is ruled by physical laws, not the capricious whim of a spirit: the triumph of science and logic. These two people believe the same thing, though one expresses it by saying, "God exists" and the other expresses it by saying, "God does not exist."

What I've come to realize in the past decade since the Manifesto is that there are also different things that could be meant by the word "exist." One is physical existence: "Is this a thing in our world, which we can discover by experiment?" This is what people usually mean when they say that something is "real." It is the business of science to identify things in this category, from the platypus to protons.

Next is mathematical existence, the question of whether an idea is logically sound. When a mathematician says that a solution exists to such-and-such a problem, they mean that there is a valid way to satisfy its constraints. Often, they speak of these solutions as mathematical "objects." Three-sided triangles exist but four-sided triangles do not. Or to pick an example that's not immediately determined by its definition, straight lines that intersect twice in a Euclidean plane do not exist—it requires a little logic beyond the definitions of "straight lines" and "intersect" to see that it can't happen twice, and we have to throw in a qualifier like "in the Euclidean plane" to exclude non-standard but logically consistent concepts of geometry. In Kant's terminology, I'm talking about a priori statements, whether analytic (contained within their definitions) or synthetic (requiring a chain of logical deduction, but still a purely mental exercise). I've been in arguments where someone wants to assert that they only believe in what can be proven by experiment, when I know that they believe in logical statements whose proofs are rational, yet independent of experiment.

There have been debates for centuries about whether mathematical objects are real like physical objects, with proponents of all three positions: (a) they're both real, (b) mathematical objects are not real like physical objects, and (c) physical objects are not as real as the mathematical ones. Why can't we just say that they're different categories with neither being "higher" or "more real" than the other? We could adopt stricter language, in which physical things "exist" or "do not exist" and mathematical ones are "valid" or "invalid." The platypus or proton is not more or better because its discovery required information from sources beyond our minds, and equilateral triangles are not more or better because they don't. But also, they're not the same sorts of things—one is not true in the same way that another is true.

Articulation is good. There are different kinds of truth and here are two of them. They mix in practice: scientific discoveries require logical thinking and they are often framed in mathematical language, but the existence of protons is not the same as the quantum field theory that provides a language for talking about such a thing. Mathematicians can claim to be more pure in that the reverse is not true—they can reason about logical forms without mixing them with anything discovered through the senses—but I don't see purity as a goal so much as articulation.

There's a third category. I've heard it said that the third prong of Hume's fork, after matters of fact and relations of ideas, is nonsense. If a statement is not about the world of the senses, in which truths are identified by consistency, or the world of logic, in which truths are identified by reduction to a grammar, then claims to truth are unhinged and equally suspect. But anybody who believes that undermines their own beliefs: this third category includes the subjectivity that is the start of all inquiry, the awareness of our own beliefs that must come before listing what they are.

The physical world is a haze of particles—we could scientifically "discover" that they're in some random configuration at one time and another random configuration at another time and never run out of things to discover. But that's not what scientists do. They look for _interesting_ facts about the universe, statements that connect phenomea previously thought to be unrelated or represent exceptions to what was thought to be a general rule. Every scientific discovery is framed as a story.

The mathematical world is an infinitude of possibilities—we could prove logically valid statements about uninteresting numbers forever. But that's not what mathematicians do. They look for _interesting_ relationships, connecting phenomena previously thought to be unrelated or contradictions to what was thought to be correct. Every mathematical theorem is framed as a story.

So in the sense that science is integrated with math and math is uncorrupted by science, both are inexorably mixed with subjectivity about what makes an interesting discovery. You can't take the human elements out of the hard sciences because that would leave the hard sciences with nothing to do. Even a computer cataloging facts is not cataloging facts until a subjective mind interprets what the computer is doing as cataloging facts.

My manifesto from 2006 started with a metaphor: a cat peering out of a paper bag. From the cat's perspective, the ridge of the bag encircles the living room, but we can see that the living room encircles the bag. It was a roundabout way of describing the mind-body problem: do our thinking selves encompass the physical universe or is our ability to think a by-product of matter, specifically brains?

In my youth, I would have answered, "Obviously thoughts are made of matter. You can prod a brain with electrical stimuli or drugs to provoke thoughts. Sleep supresses them and death extinguishes them. Everlasting spirits are wishful thinking!" In 2006, I was turning. I had talked to and really listened to people with different enough points of view to see that it wasn't just wishful thinking, even though it would be kind of nice not to die. Now I have to say, "Thoughts are primary. Whatever you might say about areas lighting up in my brain on an fMRI machine, you can't talk about that objective discovery without going through your own subjective thought process. You might conclude that my thoughts are mere spasms of neurons, but in doing so, you're asserting that your own thoughts aren't."

Subjectivity frames mathematical ideas and scientific discoveries as much as mathematical ideas frame scientific discoveries. Science can't be practiced without math—every objective discovery about the world must be expressed in some sort of logical model—but neither can be practiced without storytelling, or the value judgement that some discoveries are more interesting than others, or the impetus to study anything or make any statements at all. Only "subjective nonsense" can be pure.

Worse still, this third category is the only one we can truly access: the reality of the physical world is a supposition, particular discoveries are always uncertain, and mathematical theorems can be mistaken. The existence of brains is more of an act of faith than the existence of spirit. If I know anything at all, I know that I think, but the existence of physical objects causing sense-experiences is a conjecture suggested by their consistency: Descartes' "I think therefore I am." Plato gave the physical world a second-rate status to logic, but even logic can only be grasped at, never reached: how can I say that I've checked a proof carefully enough for the certainty that logic requires?

The uncomfortable thing about this is that the realm of subjective thought—claims about what should be, ethically or aesthetically, about what a thing means, what it's for, what we should do with our lives—are exactly the kinds of things we humans disagree on. We see them directly but without consistency, while the objective worlds of physical fact and logical validity are beyond our direct apprehension, yet tantalizingly consistent. The world is inside out.

It would be easy to say that human disagreements about one painting being more beautiful than another or whether murder is wrong are due to brain cells firing in different ways—randomly or in response to different stimuli—but while one human may say that another's thoughts are determined by such misfires, one cannot say that about one's own thoughts, not with those own thoughts remaining thoughts in their own estimation.

I've name-dropped philosophers because this is not a new problem, and I would assert that it's not one that more information (matters of fact) or cleverness (relations of ideas) can solve. It will always be with us, and we would have this problem even if we weren't sentient animals. Even if we were intelligent machines or angels unencumbered by physical substance, self-knowledge would be a precondition for knowing anything else.

There is only one way that the paradox can be escaped, and that would be if you were the _only_ sentience. Not just the only sentience in the universe, but the only sentience, without a universe. If all you had was self-knowledge and no one to contradict it, there would be no inconsistency and no external world to imperfectly know, logical or physical. Your opinions would be facts: anything you think up is correct because there are no alternatives, no standards by which to judge them. As the physicists say, there's nothing to break the symmetry.

The reason I bring up this far-fetched solution, lonely as it sounds, is that it's an apt definition for God. Only a being like that is absolute, and anything it imagines is by definition real. Mathematical perfection is one of its ideas, the existence of something, rather than nothing (or rather than everything), is another. Beings similar to itself are yet another idea that it might have, and perhaps they can be derived from physical substance in such a way that these thinking animals can see their own origins, in a way that God himself will never know.

I've phrased this in theistic terms—"a being," "absolute," "its ideas"—like I've pulled a trick on you, leading with an ever-present philosophical problem and pretending that a traditional concept of God is the only solution. It's the terminology that's at fault: "a Being" belongs to the theist camp; "a Principle" belongs to the atheists. It would be hard, even in an atheistic philosophy that admits the primacy of sentience, to not see the universe as actualizing itself in some way—that matter gives rise to animals that allow the universe to be conceptualized.

My point in undercutting the "Does God exist?" question is that it forces us into camps, whereas an alterantive, "What is the universe like?" asks the same question without baggage. In fact, it seems to me that what varies most among people's views of the cosmos is not the fundamentals, stripped of parochial terms, but which parts they tend to focus on. I'm drawn to semantics—it matters a lot to me to get at the meanings of things—but then I'm shown up in thoughtfulness by someone whose first impulse is kindness.
