---
title: Software Engineering is a Social Science
---

I consider myself lucky to have been born at a time to see home computers become mainstream. My family's first computer was a TI-99/4A with a broken "6" (obtained by barter—long story) that you had to screw into the antenna jack of your TV to use as a monitor. It had 16 colors when I managed to commandeer the color TV. I learned to program at an early age because this computer did nothing else: you turn it on and type in BASIC. You turn it off and your program is gone. Rinse, repeat.

I clearly remember grown-ups disavowing any knowledge of the newfangled things. It seemed like a point of pride to be computer illiterate. There was a stereotype that you had to be under 20 to use a computer (or to set up a VCR), and that stereotype was mostly true due to kids having no urge to prove their ignorance. (Also, we had more spare time, and figuring this stuff out was just a matter of time.) Perhaps it was because adults had preconceptions of computers as tools of power, room-sized intellectual engines that maintained corporations and governments: cold, impersonal, and sinister. If not evil, then beyond good and evil, in a world of pure thought that nullified human values.

When computers first entered public consciousness, ENIAC was designing hydrogen bombs and UNIVAC was predicting elections. (Pundits who did not run statistical models thought Eisenhower would lose.) Around this time, "brainiac" became slang for a smart person, or a person who was nothing but smart. Brainiac was one of Superman's intellectual villians. Later, HAL was the villian of _2001_, killing astronauts with a calm, disembodied voice. But today, computers are a medium, a way to watch TV shows, play games, or call our friends. We've gone _through_ the phase in which most people own a desktop or laptop—now most people's computers fit in their pockets.

In that same 30 years, I switched from an intention to study computer science to physics, helped build the Large Hadron Collider, and have since switched back to computers, developing software for physicists. From my perspective, perhaps because I contrast it with physics, the world as it is, computers seem to be the embodiment of humanness, the world in our image. Cyberspace is the universe that we want: rational, not ambiguous, inspectable down to the smallest bit, not shrouded in uncertainty, and built out of grammar like a human language.

The physical universe is at odds with human rationality. Even before the discovery of quantum mechanics strained this relationship to the breaking point, humans have had a long history of misapplying logic to physics. Aristotle's _Physics_ is full of brilliant errors. The ancients seemed to think that forces and motion are an application of geometry—you establish some axioms, build up theorems, and end up claiming that the Earth does not move "because birds would fall off their perches." There was no room for experimenter's regress, the idea that contrary evidence might be more complex than it appears.


